+++
title = "Bill Gate's Final Chapter"
date = 2025-05-26
description = "Something to brighten your day in our late stage capitalist society"
[taxonomies]
tags = ["philanthropy", "musings", "legacy"]
+++

In one of my previous jobs, somewhere around 2015ish, we were given an assignment to improve our public speaking and presentation skills as well as to serve to get to know folks better.  The assignment was to pick a public figure who you found inspiring and explain why.  In 2025, I ruefully look back on my selection of Elon Musk as a failure in discerning credibility and character.  At the time though, he was going to electrify America with an affordable Tesla 3 in every driveway and a stylish solar power generating roof on every home.  He was making huge strides in making reusable rocket boosters a reality and promoting a dream of one day colonizing Mars.  It was exciting stuff and his appeals to a greener, technology fueled future deeply appealed to me.  When folks told him he couldn't build a reusable rocket he proceeded anyway and soon proved them wrong.  I thought his vision of the future was something to be admired and filled my allotted presentation time with a list of his accomplishments and goals and was ready to proclaim him Mayor of Muskville on Mars.

Over the last few years, whatever admiration I had for him has eroded to nothing with first his social media antics and now his political manipulations promoting his own self interests and fascism. 

But the same contempt I now hold for Musk was something I also once held for Bill Gates in the early 00's.  Like Musk, Gates was the world's richest man at various points in time, invoking an unreasonable sense of envy, He had gotten to that lofty position as CEO of one of the largest software companies in the world and during his tenure he did some shady things to suppress and overcome his competition.  Anyone else remember this early internet meme of Gates as a member of Star Trek's Borg whose creed was, "Resistance is futile, you will be assimilated."? 

{{ feature_image(path="/content/blog/images/bill-gates-borg.jpg", width=0, height=300, op="fit_height", caption="") }}

Now though many folks see Gates in a much different light, including myself.  Many have dubbed him the elder statesman of technology and Silicon Valley though it has been his commitment to his (and former wife Melinda's) [Gates Foundation](https://www.gatesnotes.com/meet-bill/my-philanthropy) and the radical decision to disburse all of his wealth to charitable causes that impresses me now.  Gates spends time reading and researching on how the world works so that he can make informed, science backed decisions on where to invest his wealth.  These investments though are not meant to grow that wealth or his status but to benefit some of the most underserved communities in the world to fight [disease](https://gcgh.grandchallenges.org/), [sanitation](https://www.gatesfoundation.org/our-work/programs/global-growth-and-opportunity/water-sanitation-and-hygiene/reinvent-the-toilet-challenge-and-expo), and [nutrition](https://www.gatesfoundation.org/our-work/programs/global-growth-and-opportunity/nutrition) issues.  Gates, through his personal blog, [shares thoughts and reviews](https://www.gatesnotes.com/books) on many of the books that are influencing his thinking and that he finds insightful.  (If I was a bigger reader of non-fiction he would be a go-to source of reading material because many of the books he reviews sound fascinating!)  I can only wish to be as thoughtful and eloquent in my reviews as he is in his own.  When you start looking at the exploits of other billionaires passion projects to launch rockets to space, Gates focus on improving the world we live in now and in ways that don't provide any financial benefit to himself is beyond commendable.  Its a breath of fresh air that reminds us that those who achieve great success not only have a great responsibility to society but are actually capable and _willing_ to give back to that society.

If you've read this far, you're maybe wondering why I'm bothering to gush about Gates in particular.  He recently shared an update on his blog titled, [My new deadline: 20 years to give away virtually all my wealth](https://www.gatesnotes.com/home/home-page-topic/reader/n20-years-to-give-away-virtually-all-my-wealth) Take a few minutes, go and read it, its a lot better than this.

Did you read it? Amazing, right? It made me feel some glimmer of hope and good about the world.  That there are folk out there in the world who have come into great wealth and privilege and are using that to make the world better.  I'm going to borrow the same highlight from Gates' post here where he writes, "As Microsoft turns 50 years old, it feels right that I celebrate the milestone by committing to give away the resources I earned through the company."  _wow_ What if more billionaires took that mentality to their wealth.  Maybe more pertinently, what if more regular folk took that mindset?  What will I do with the things that I leave behind?  What am I doing _today_ with the resources and time I've earned or been given to help others?  Hard questions indeed.

I don't know that I would have ever seen myself saying it before, but, thank you, Mr. Gates for becoming a role model of philanthropy and giving hope and opportunity to so many.  May your final chapter be filled with joy in seeing the positive impact of your contributions.
