+++
title = "Job Hunting: Day 1"
date = 2025-10-16
description = "The first day of my unemployment wasn't as bad as I thought it was going to be."
[taxonomies]
tags = ["job hunting", "opentowork", "musings"]
+++

Two days ago my company announced that we'd be having a Reduction in Force to the tune of 40% of our staff.  With approximately 200 employees in the company at the time of the announcement we knew this to be around 75 positions.  Yesterday I got the call that I was going to be separating from the company.  I wasn't particularly shocked by this.  I had survived two prior RIFs at this company, I knew the company was doing this to cut costs and long tenured, senior software engineers are not a cheap commodity.  What I hadn't suspected was just how deeply those cuts would be to our engineering department.  At the end of the day approximately 50% of the engineering staff had been let go including almost all of its senior engineers and other long tenured folks like myself with deep institutional knowledge.  I was more shocked and saddened by their dismissals than my own.  All of these folks are truly exceptional engineers and people.  

Today was my first day of being unemployed.  I have been fortunate enough to have had continuous employment since before graduating from college way back in 2006 and now being faced with what could be a long job hunt and not being employed is a strange prospect to me.  I had originally decided that since getting the news on Wednesday that I was going to take things easy today and tomorrow.  I was going to sleep in, play some video games, and just rest and heal and process this new shift in my life.

I didn't do too well at that plan.  The only one I successfully completed today was sleeping in which really isn't that hard of feat for me since me and the morning are not really on that great of terms to begin with.  Once I was up though I was feeling energized.  Something of a burden had been lifted from my shoulders in that I didn't have to contend with decisions by management that I didn't agree with or follow a product roadmap that didn't align with what I felt would add the most value to our clients and our bottom line.

Instead, my day started with checking in on my fellow engineers who had also been let go.  We had previously established a channel for communicating outside of work, and it was a lively place today as others emotions ranged from anxiety, dread, and concern over what comes next to those who, like myself, saw this as an opportunity for a fresh start and to reinvent ourselves.  To take some time and learn some new language or framework or to start that exercise regime they had been meaning to for a while now.  I can't begin to say how glad I am to still be in contact with these wonderful people.  The one thing our former employer was excellent at was hiring smart and caring individuals and then fostering a culture where relationships and friendships with your coworkers could develop.  Rarely have I ever worked in a place where I've wanted to keep in contact with so many former coworkers.  We've been sharing job leads, offering to do mock interviews to help folks brush the cobwebs off those skills, entertaining each other with humor, and consoling each other with empathy. If any of you stumble across this, you all are the best I've ever had the pleasure of working with.

Being a strict always work from my home office and desk setup person, I already felt like I was being hugely indulgent in just sitting on my sofa conversing with coworkers but I decided to take it one step further and went out and sat on my back patio with my laptop and glass of tea.  With working remotely, I've always had the freedom to work from wherever in my home but have never wanted to sacrifice my nice keyboard or multimonitor setup at my desk, feeling to do so would make me less productive.  As I sat there though, the sky a gorgeous clear blue, the weather a perfect 67F and a light breeze, I really regretted not doing this sooner.  There is some part of us that was made to be outdoors far more than probably many software engineers find themselves.

{{ feature_image(path="/content/blog/images/PatioLife.jpeg", width=0, height=400, op="fit_height", caption="Pardon my overgrown flower beds but the weather really was too splendid to not be outside.") }}

Remember how I said I was feeling energized a few paragraphs back?  Well between that, the weather, and the positive vibes from my former coworkers I cracked open LinkedIn and got to work.  I had a message from my former VP (who also got let go during this) with contact information for some of her peers who were hiring so I sent emails with resumes to them.  LinkedIn contacts who had seen my post about being #opentowork had sent me solid leads and in some cases referrals that I followed up on.  I sorted through the slew of "recruiter" messages that come from changing your status to open to work.  ("recruiter" being in quotes as some of these are scams from accounts that are days old and with zero content with them, but a few were legit.)  I continued to talk with my colleagues.  I completed a personality assessment which was a fascinating process since my former company also provided behavioral assessments for hiring.  And at 3PM when my son's bus got home, I closed my laptop and we hung out for a while and chatted.  I sat on the sofa and watched him play some Fortnite while he provided commentary about which "kids" were bots and which ones were "cooking" and who was "cooked".  I ran some errands outside the house, picked my daughter up from after school activities and enjoyed dinner with them.  To round out the night we watched a couple episodes of a favorite show together before shooing them off to get ready for bed.

I know there are going to be hard days ahead.  I know there are going to be tough interviews, rejection letters, and the ticking clock of how long severance and savings will last until I find a job.  But I also want to remember this first day of being unemployed, it was a _good_ day and there will be more good days to come.